hey this is presto Walker and you're
watching mind your decisions the problem
in today's video comes from the American
Invitational mathematics examination
more commonly called the Amy the Amy is
the second test to qualify for the u.s.
mathematical Olympiad team it's a
three-hour test with 15 questions and no
calculators are allowed the average
score is around 3 which is a mere 20%
it's a hard test even for the talented
students who qualified to take it in
this video I'm going to present problem
14 from the 1987 test the problem is to
evaluate the following fraction every
answer on the Amy is an integer from 0
to 999 inclusive I think Anoop from
India for suggesting this problem can
you figure it out give this problem a
try and when you're ready keep watching
the video for a solution
so how can we simplify this fraction
well get started by identifying a
pattern every single parenthetical term
in this fraction is of the form X to the
power of 4 plus 324 furthermore we can
factor 324 into 4 times 3 to the power
of 4 how can we simplify this I didn't
know this trick but apparently in
mathematical competitions there's a well
known identity called the Sophie Germain
identity it states that a to the power 4
plus 4 times B to the power 4 is equal
to the following it's the product of
these two terms
it's a squared plus 2 B squared minus 2
a B and the other term is a squared plus
2 B squared plus 2 a B so we'll apply
this identity to X to the 4 plus 324 and
we get the following we can then
simplify this by factoring and we get
the product of the following binomials
we are now going to use this
simplification into every single term in
the fraction let's get started with an
example of 10 to the 4 plus 324 here we
have X is equal to 10 so we substitute
that into our formula and then simplify
it now let's take a look at 4 to the
power 4 plus 324 here we have X is equal
to 4 so we simplify it to get the
following so it seems like we haven't
actually made things any simpler we've
actually expanded out each term but
there's a cancellation that'll make
things simpler so let's imagine we're
just evaluating this fraction we
simplified the numerator and the
denominator and now here's the trick the
first term in the numerator cancels out
with the second term in the denominator
so we have this fraction simplify to be
just the following fraction this is
going to be a little bit easier to
evaluate
now to get back to our original question
we're going to do a much more involved
simplification so we're going to use the
Sophie Germain identity and use the
formula presented here to simplify every
single term in the numerator and every
single term in the denominator now let's
take a look if there's any cancellation
the first term in the numerator cancels
out with the second term in the
denominator then the second term in the
numerator cancels out with the third
term in the denominator and this pattern
continues so we're going to cancel out
all of these terms and it goes all the
way until the very end the only thing
that survives is the very last term in
the numerator and the very first term in
the denominator this kind of pattern is
reminiscent of a retracting telescope
where the only thing that survives is
the first thing and the very last thing
so our fraction simplifies to be just
the following and it's an example of a
telescoping product so now we just need
to simplify this fraction well that's
not too hard the numerator is equal to
and the denominator is equal to 10 we
divide and we get the answer of 373
thanks for watching these math videos
which can be watched for free on youtube
build confidence for students and
inspire mathematical discovery for
viewers around the world they have over
a hundred million views and the channel
has over 1 million subscribers please
subscribe for free to get the newest
videos and email me a puzzle or math
topic pressure and mind your decisions
calm if you so choose you can check out
my merchandise on teespring you can
check my books which are listed in the
video description and you can support me
on patreon thanks for watching and
thanks for your support